# UBIRCH client (go)

The UBIRCH client provides signature and chaining services to seal original data generated on-premise. It takes care of
 packaging the hashed data into a chained *UBIRCH PROTOCOL PACKET ("UPP")*, signing the package and sending it to the 
 UBIRCH backend for storage, anchoring in the blockchain, and as a source for verification requests.
 
*The original data must be stored in a customer database to be able to execute verification requests at a later stage.
 UBIRCH does not store any original sensitive data!*
 
UPP data is sent to the UBIRCH client via HTTP requests. The client can receive either the original data as a JSON data
 package which will be formatted and hashed (SHA256) by the client, or the binary representation of a hash that is directly
 added to the UPP.
 
The UBIRCH client stores its signing keys and the signature of the last UPP persistently to ensure an intact chain even
 after a restart.

### Dockerized UBIRCH client
The UBIRCH client is provided as a docker image that can be configured and run on any system that can run docker (Intel/AMD64 or ARM64 architecture).
 
Docker Hub Address: [ubirch/ubirch-client](https://docker.hub/ubirch/ubirch-client:stable) (multi-architecture image)

[Jump to Quick Start](#quick-start)

### Requirements
- System based on Intel/AMD64 or ARM
- Docker installation
- Space to store last used signatures and key material, either:
    - disk space, mounted into the docker pod, or 
    - as SQL database
- Possibility to send a HTTP request to UBIRCH.com domains
- A unique identifier (UUID) registered with the UBIRCH console
- A corresponding authentication token (acquired via UBIRCH console)
- A password for the client’s key store
- (OPTIONAL) a private ECDSA (ecdsa-prime256v1) key
    *(otherwise a new key is generated by the client itself)*

### Configuration
The client may be configured using a configuration file (`config.json`) or by using environment variables
 that can be passed to the docker executable.

The client is able to handle multiple cryptographic identities (i.e. for multiple LAN based devices). The UUIDs for
 these devices must be declared in the configuration file together with their respective authentication token. Only
 requests from *known* UUIDs will be accepted by the client.

The client will first look if the `UBIRCH_SECRET` env variable exists and load the configuration from the environment
 variables in that case. If the `UBIRCH_SECRET` env variable is not set or empty, and the `config.json`-file exists in 
 the working directory, the configuration will be loaded from the file. If neither exist, the client will abort and exit.
 
The only two mandatory configurations are 
- the `devices`-map, which maps device UUIDs to their authentication token 
(see [here](#how-to-acquire-the-ubirch-backend-token) how to acquire the authentication token),
- and the 16 byte base64 encoded `secret`, which is used to encrypt the key store.

#### File Based Configuration 
`config.json`:
```
{
  "devices": {
    "<UUID>": "<ubirch backend auth token>"
  },
  "secret": "<16 byte secret used to encrypt the key store (base64 encoded)>"
}
```
(See [example_config.json](main/example_config.json) for an example.)

#### Environment Based Configuration
```
export UBIRCH_DEVICES="<UUID>:<ubirch backend auth token>"
export UBIRCH_SECRET=<16 byte secret used to encrypt the key store  (base64 encoded)>
```
(See [example.env](main/example.env) for an example.)
 
 All other configuration parameters have default values, but can be configured as follows.

#### Set a UBIRCH backend environment
The `env` configuration refers to the UBIRCH backend environment. The default value is `prod`, which is the
production environment. For development, the reference to “prod” may be replaced by “demo”, which is a test system
that works like the production environment, but stores data only in a blockchain test net.

- add the following key-value pair to your `config.json`:
```
  "env": "<ubirch backend environment, defaults to 'prod'>"
```
- or set the following environment variable:
```
export UBIRCH_ENV=<ubirch backend environment, defaults to 'prod'>
```
 
#### Use a SQL database to store the protocol context
The `DSN` (*Data Source Name*) can be used to connect the client to a SQL database for storing the protocol context 
(i.e. the encrypted keystore, key certificates and last signatures) persistently. If DSN is not set or empty, the 
client will create a file `protocol.json` (and `protocol.json.bck`) locally in the working directory.

If you want to use a SQL database instead of a local file, make sure to apply the 
[database schema](main/schema.sql), as the application will not create it itself on first run, and 
set the DSN in the configuration.

- add the following key-value pair to your `config.json`:
```
  "DSN": "<data source name for database>"
```
- or set the following environment variable:
```
export UBIRCH_DSN=<data source name for database>
```

#### Inject signing keys
The `staticKeys`-flag may be used to disable dynamic key generation and only accept requests from UUIDs with injected
signing key. The default value for this flag is `false`, which means the client will per default generate a new ECDSA
(prime256v1) key pair if it receives a request from a UUID without a corresponding signing key in the keystore.

Instead of having the client generate keys dynamically it is possible to inject signing keys as a map UUID to signing key.

- add the following key-value pair to your `config.json`:
```
  "staticKeys": <boolean, defaults to ‘false’>,
  "keys": {"<UUID>": "<ecdsa-prime256v1 private key (base64 encoded)>"}
```
- or set the following environment variable:
```
export UBIRCH_STATICKEYS=<boolean, defaults to ‘false’>
export UBIRCH_KEYS="<UUID>:<ecdsa-prime256v1 private key (base64 encoded)>"
```

> ECDSA signing keys (prime256v1) can be generated on the command line using openssl:
```console
$ openssl ecparam -genkey -name prime256v1 -noout | openssl ec -text -noout | grep priv -A 3 | tail -n +2 | tr -d ': ' | xxd -r -p | base64
```

*Either way (dynamically generated or injected) the client will register the public key at the UBIRCH key service and
store the keys persistently in the encrypted keystore.*
 
#### Serve HTTPS
##### Create a self-signed TLS certificate
In order to serve HTTPS endpoints, you can run the following command to create a self-signed certificate with openssl.
 With this command it will be valid for ten years.
```console
$ openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:4096 -keyout key.pem -nodes -out cert.pem -days 3650
``` 

##### Enable TLS in configuration
To enable TLS for the UBIRCH client service, add the following key-value pair to your `config.json`:
```
  "TLS": true
```
...or set the following environment variable:
```
export UBIRCH_TLS=true
```

By default, docker client will look for the `key.pem` and `cert.pem` files in the working directory 
(same location as the config file), but you can define a different location (relative to the working 
directory) and/or filename by adding them to your configuration file like this:
```
  "TLSCertFile": "<path/to/TLS-cert-filename>",
  "TLSKeyFile": "<path/to/TLS-key-filename>"
```
...or if you are using environment based configuration:
```
export UBIRCH_TLS_CERTFILE=certs/cert.pem
export UBIRCH_TLS_KEYFILE=certs/key.pem
```

#### How to acquire the ubirch backend token
- Register at the **UBIRCH web UI**: https://console.prod.ubirch.com/ or https://console.demo.ubirch.com/
- Go to **Things** (in the menu on the left) and click on `+ ADD NEW DEVICE`
- Enter your device UUID to the **ID** field. You can also add a description for your device, if you want. Then click on `register`. 
- Your device should now show up under **Your Things**-overview. Click on it and copy the "password" (which looks like a UUID) as the ubirch backend token.

### Run Client in Docker container
To start the multi-arch Docker image on any system, run:
```console
$ docker pull ubirch/ubirch-client:stable
$ docker run -v $(pwd):/data --network=host ubirch/ubirch-client:stable
```
The default configuration directory inside the docker container is `/data`.
The docker image mounts the current directory (`$(pwd)`) into the */data* path to 
load the configuration file, if configuration is not set via environment variables, 
and the TLS certificate and key files, if TLS is enabled. 
If no DSN (database) is set in the configuration, the image stores the protocol context 
(i.e. keystore, key certificates and last signatures) in this directory as well, 
in which case the directory must be writable. 

It is also possible to pass an absolute path instead of `$(pwd)` or change the default configuration directory 
with the following call.
```console
$ docker run -v $(pwd):/some-path/some-dir --network=host ubirch/ubirch-client:stable /some-path/some-dir
```

### Interface Description
The UBIRCH client provides two HTTP endpoints for both original data that will be hashed by the client,
 and direct data hash injection.

| Method | Path | Content-Type | Description |
|--------|------|--------------|-------------|
| POST | `/<UUID>` | `application/json` | JSON data package |
| POST | `/<UUID>/hash` | `application/octet-stream` | hash (binary) |

To access either endpoint an authentication token, which corresponds to the `UUID` used in the request,
 must be sent with the request header. Without it, the client won’t accept the request:

| `X-Auth-Token:` | `ubirch backend token related to <UUID>` |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------| 

Response codes indicate the successful delivery of the UPP to the UBIRCH backend.
 Any code other than `200` should be considered a failure. The client does not retry itself.
 A good approach to handle errors is to add a flag to the original data storage that indicates whether the
 UBIRCH blockchain anchoring was successful and retry at a later point if necessary.
 
 > Note: **Floating-point numbers and integers greater than 2^53 are invalid values for the JSON data package!**

## Quick Start
1. First, you will need a device UUID, an auth token, and a 16 byte secret:
    1. Generate a UUID. On Linux simply enter `uuidgen` in your terminal. Alternatively, you can use an online tool.
    2. Get your auth token from the [UBIRCH web UI](https://console.demo.ubirch.com/):
        - Login or register if you don't have an account yet.
        - Go to **Things** and click on `+ ADD NEW DEVICE`.
        - Enter your UUID to the **ID** field, add a description for your device and click on `register`.
        - Click on your device in the overview and copy the value of the **"password"** from the `apiConfig` as your auth token.
    3. To encrypt the locally stored keys, we need a 16 byte secret in base64 format. 
    You can enter `head -c 16 /dev/urandom | base64` in a Linux terminal 
    or encode 16 ASCII characters in an online base64 converter.

1. Create a file `config.json` in your desired working directory with the following content:
    ```
    {
      "devices": {
        "<YOUR_UUID>": "<YOUR_AUTH_TOKEN>"
      },
      "secret": "<YOUR_16_BYTE_SECRET(base64 encoded)>",
      "env": "demo"
    }
    ```
    - Replace `<YOUR_UUID>` with your UUID from step 1.i.
    - Replace `<YOUR_AUTH_TOKEN>` with your auth token from step 1.ii.
    - Replace `<YOUR_16_BYTE_SECRET(base64 encoded)>` with your secret from step 1.iii.
    > Make sure you leave the quotes! [Here](main/example_config.json) is an example of how it should look like.

1. To run the dockerized UBIRCH client, you will need to have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/) installed on your computer. 
Then just enter the following two lines in your working directory:
    ```console
    $ docker pull ubirch/ubirch-client:stable
    $ docker run -v $(pwd):/data --network=host ubirch/ubirch-client:stable
    ```
    You should see a console output like this:
    ```
    2020/04/14 13:40:54 UBIRCH client (v2.0.0, build=local)
    2020/04/14 13:40:54 loading configuration from file (config.json)
    2020/04/14 13:40:54 loaded protocol context: 0 certificates, 0 signatures
    ```
    That means the client is running and ready!
    
1. The client is now listening for HTTP POST requests on port `8080`. You can either...
   - send JSON data to the `/<UUID>`-endpoint with `Content-Type: application/json`-header, or 
   - send hashes to the `/<UUID>/hash`-endpoint with `Content-Type: application/octet-stream`-header. 
   
   Also, set the `X-Auth-Token`-header with your ubirch backend auth token.
   
   Since the data hash for every UPP must be unique, ensure that the body of each request has a unique content. You can 
   do that, for example, by adding an ID and a timestamp to the JSON data package.
   
   **Floating-point numbers and integers greater than 2^53 are invalid values for the JSON data package!** 
   If you need to sign floating-point numbers or numbers greater than 9,007,199,254,740,992, you can pass them as string.

   Here is an example of how a request to the client would look like using `CURL`:
   ```
   curl -H "X-Auth-Token: <YOUR_AUTH_TOKEN>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id": "605b91b4-49be-4f17-93e7-f1b14384968f", "ts": 1585838578, "data": "1234567890"}' localhost:8080/<YOUR_UUID> -i -s
   ```
   > Insert `<YOUR_AUTH_TOKEN>` and `<YOUR_UUID>` and a request body with your own unique content to ensure a unique hash!
   
   When the client receives the request, the output should look like this:
   ```
   2020/04/14 13:46:34 8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f: generating new key pair
   2020/04/14 13:46:35 8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f: registering public key at key service
   2020/04/14 13:46:35 8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f: CERT: {"pubKeyInfo":{"algorithm":"ecdsa-p256v1","created":"2020-04-14T22:46:35.008Z","hwDeviceId":"8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f","pubKey":"mSmvMcuI9FeRWiSRC4NO7Xuz8YpK2QT+GWf91m4braTNtwHC3pNLJg+HjsipxcF0gX94bNycPmaEf5DFIkeslA==","pubKeyId":"mSmvMcuI9FeRWiSRC4NO7Xuz8YpK2QT+GWf91m4braTNtwHC3pNLJg+HjsipxcF0gX94bNycPmaEf5DFIkeslA==","validNotAfter":"2021-04-14T22:46:35.008Z","validNotBefore":"2020-04-14T22:46:35.008Z"},"signature":"WeJoAVJTgQD5XhO8MfFk0H9kG42taowMVAK7Jtx/H5ebU6eGmT4BixGOUroHPUoEDGlteMp39lVdeLd53YmIGw=="}
   2020/04/14 13:46:35 8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f: key registration successful
   2020/04/14 13:46:35 8a70ad8b-a564-4e58-9a3b-224ac0f0153f: hash: Y0I9f0GrIj4V6RGh6FW4IzCLj/bQa8uMpLjYtr7OFQk=
   ```
   > Take note of the hash!
   
   If your request was submitted, you'll get a `HTTP/1.1 200 OK` response.
   
   The HTTP response body from the client is a map containing the data hash and the UPP, that has been sent 
   to the UBIRCH backend, and the response from the backend, which is a UPP as well. UPPs are in *msgpack*-format.
   
   ```json
    {
      "hash": "bTawDQO7nnB+3h55/6VyQ+Tmd1RTV9R0cFcf7CRWzQQ=",
      "response": "liPEEJ08eP8i80RBpdGFxjbUhv/EQPgwxioCe/xc+22gjjvULF32Q+zZNDosE0msmzyppKHihm2a7wb7g3VJoXg2UhpM4xS87kAapI+m+QRONig9bIkAgadtZXNzYWdlv3lvdXIgcmVxdWVzdCBoYXMgYmVlbiBzdWJtaXR0ZWTEQP/3P6UH0G8qY5t9bdSjroKVI4N5KScCHKJ9xsoHhesLLv9dCgdD0UoGvc/Mg9x0PGHKVoxKBwPs1v95+M+EQQQ=",
      "upp": "liPEEPfutp5U60IAt/7nLuSggtLEQPgwxioCe/xc+22gjjvULF32Q+zZNDosE0msmzyppKHihm2a7wb7g3VJoXg2UhpM4xS87kAapI+m+QRONig9bIkAxCBtNrANA7uecH7eHnn/pXJD5OZ3VFNX1HRwVx/sJFbNBMRAZqKMnYa7nuyfmyV1dAUxwBvXG3fdZYUxyRE+mfeC/GWDwNXE4Tga5iauFfzOaULeNcUR2msAzwcL0FObMZaNaw=="
    }
   ```
   
1. To stop the client, press `ctrl` + `c`.
   
1. You can verify that your data hash was received, verified, chained and anchored by the UBIRCH backend
   - in the [UBIRCH web UI](https://console.demo.ubirch.com/verification/graph)
   - or with CURL: 
   
        `curl -d '<YOUR_HASH>' https://verify.demo.ubirch.com/api/upp/verify/anchor`
   
        If the verification was successful, the response looks like this:
        ```json
        {
          "upp": "liPEEJnqh/TPxEVni9ELTBXq9V7EQGOMAcwCV4rbHGZT+A8sd2DOpRB2mdUyZSSg7wB5hYNix5CszzbhRksmDTP/mADH1EBEPnUgfXbo6Y6dbFBL6CgAxCAy+oS7kDq+fc74gcKSX1UsG0iuOx5iwkW/MyED7Df9PcRAQ9hNm3gkM5vyeIX8zwI+7D/VbsgpLV5o4oYLFo7FilA8Urj5ELQNrC0PKYKco0LoC7xNbVoIhrvOnLNZVyme3w==",
          "prev": "liPEEJnqh/TPxEVni9ELTBXq9V7EQFMVGwqOGvuiYahX5+1E9Le/Jse778baMOWX4kPCuvTQnwzCoFOvHY09aor7Wl0Hn7h2mPg7kdJ6N2ZRGKNtXB0AxCCPcQmVZAl1b++fj5h0r17cb1+zPJS3WnjqYt+JsmrZoMRAY4wBzAJXitscZlP4Dyx3YM6lEHaZ1TJlJKDvAHmFg2LHkKzPNuFGSyYNM/+YAMfUQEQ+dSB9dujpjp1sUEvoKA==",
          "anchors": [
            {
              "label": "PUBLIC_CHAIN",
              "properties": {
                "timestamp": "2020-04-16T22:09:17.836Z",
                "hash": "CAGRDRTQBNNHHQONUHBMWPHMUTMCYJ9XNKJJNTHMBUZXYKEUKTERIFMNNFBKWUAMAMXERJBQQFNQWA999",
                "public_chain": "IOTA_TESTNET_IOTA_TESTNET_NETWORK",
                "prev_hash": "ca6d36581d1265d38d7cb69a6a410aefb5142cbd31c3004cb7bbe6ec83457d9c683eb0a2e498083699e9e6dc233356be0df6f9fb2e1810d65e71b1bd155b3580",
                "type": "PUBLIC_CHAIN"
              }
            },
            {
              "label": "PUBLIC_CHAIN",
              "properties": {
                "timestamp": "2020-04-16T22:09:25.614Z",
                "hash": "0x229d8e167a45efe8a552fff884ca2ca540d331dbd51a427107d8ac12f184dc25",
                "public_chain": "ETHEREUM_TESTNET_RINKEBY_TESTNET_NETWORK",
                "prev_hash": "ca6d36581d1265d38d7cb69a6a410aefb5142cbd31c3004cb7bbe6ec83457d9c683eb0a2e498083699e9e6dc233356be0df6f9fb2e1810d65e71b1bd155b3580",
                "type": "PUBLIC_CHAIN"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
        ```
     > Note that the first UPP to be anchored will not have a 'previous' package to be chained to. The `"prev"` value will therefore be `null`.
    
        Since this endpoint is relatively slow to respond, you can do a quick check by sending a request with your hash to 
        ```
        https://verify.demo.ubirch.com/api/upp
        ```
        to only verify that your data hash was received by the UBIRCH backend, or to 
        ```
        https://verify.demo.ubirch.com/api/upp/verify
        ```
        which additionally checks the chain. 
        
        If you get an empty response, that means the hash could not be verified (yet).
        
 
 More information on the services and functionalities of the UBIRCH backend you can find here: https://developer.ubirch.com/

## Copyright

```
Copyright (c) 2019-2020 ubirch GmbH

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```

Authors: Matthias L. Jugel, Waldemar Grünwald, Roxana Meixner
